# GEP-917: Gateway API Conformance Testing

* Issue: [#917](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/issues/917)
* Status: Standard

## TLDR

This GEP outlines the principles and overarching structure that Gateway API
conformance tests will be built with.

## Goals

- Record why we are doing conformance and what we hope to achieve with it
- Record the success criteria for the conformance process and associated artifacts
- Provide a set of guidelines for conformance test structure

## Non-Goals

- Designing the conformance testing framework or implementation
- Designing the process for implementations to prove they are conformant

## Introduction

### What is Conformance

Conformance is the creation of a process that allows everyone, implementors and
users alike, to check that an implementation conforms to the defined spec.

For core Kubernetes, this also allows for the use of specific badges and branding.

It usually includes some form of test harness that can produce a standard output,
which can be submitted somewhere for validation. The place where the validations
are held is then the canonical source of information about what implementations
are conformant.

### Why do it for Gateway API?
The Gateway API is a large, complex API with many use cases and implementations.
Not all implementations support the same features, and some features have
different required support levels.

One of the primary goals of the Gateway API project is to make it safer and
easier for end users to move their traffic configuration between implementations.
Without some form of conformance to guarantee the same behavior between
implementations, this is simply not achievable.

Possibly a better way to say this is that we are looking to have Route resources
portable between Gateways with a minimum of spec change.

By creating a standard set of conformance tests and information, we can:

- Make it easier for API consumers to understand what a particular API does
- Make it possible for tooling to be constructed to check for portability
between implementations

Additionally, as the first project to develop an "official" set of CRDs, we have
a responsibility to the community to build out a set of best practices for
similar efforts in the future. Ensuring that whatever we build is reusable for
other projects will help to lift everyone who works with CRDs.

### What do we need out of conformance for Gateway API?
Must have:

- Support for only implementing some of the Gateway API CRD resources. Some resources,
like Gateway itself, are required for all implementations, but implementations
may choose what Route resources they support. There will probably be some common
sets of Route resources supported across similar implementations, but this proposal
expects that we will make calls about what to call that common experience at a
later date.
- Support for fields or features that have Core, Extended, and
ImplementationSpecific support. In particular, it must be possible for
implementations to only support some subset of Extended fields, and to be able
to use the framework for their own ImplementationSpecific features if required.
- A testing suite that can validate that an implementation meets the conformance
profiles it claims.
- A way to retrieve conformance information in a machine-parseable way.

## Proposal

### Conformance Profiles

The Gateway API project defines conformance purely in terms of what resources an
implementation supports.
To support a resource, an implementation must support all "Core" functionality
defined by the resource. Support for "Extended" functionality will be indicated
separately.

All implementations must support all the Core functions on the following resources:

- GatewayClass
- Gateway
- ReferenceGrant

The following resources are optional to support, but have defined behavior if you
do:

- HTTPRoute
- TLSRoute
- TCPRoute
- UDPRoute

For all of these resources, we should aim to have the usual range of tests for
both the happy and unhappy paths for various types of operations.

The conformance is versioned - it tracks the required features for a specific
version of the API, and must be included in and updated by a version bump in the
bundle version of the Gateway API. (The _bundle version_ is the thing that we
mark as a "release", that looks like `v0.4.0`, not `v1alpha2`). 

This will enable an implementation to say that it supports a specific version
of the Gateway API. This is again similar to upstream in that implementations need
to submit conformance test results for each version of Kubernetes they support.

Because the support is defined in terms of the resources that an implementation
supports, the conformance is composable, and orthogonal for each object type.
For example, it's valid to only support HTTPRoute and not TCPRoute, or TLSRoute
and not HTTPRoute.

### Interaction with existing support levels

Conformance definitions will ensure that an implementation can provide all the
features currently marked as "Core" support in the API documentation.

Fields marked "Extended" support will eventually have conformance tests that
lock in the behavior of that feature, and there will be a mechanism for implementations
to tell the testing framework what extended fields they support.

## Testing framework

Conformance tests will initially be structured as a CLI that runs on existing
Kubernetes clusters. This may be expanded to include a testing library that can
be imported by implementations. This tool will output test results in a
structured format that can be used to generate reports. Where possible it will
share code with the existing ingress-controller-conformance test suite.

### Test Definitions

Each set of tests will be built around a set of YAML manifests representing
Gateway API resources. The tests will focus on how they expect a given
controller to process those resources, configured via GatewayClass name. For
example, tests may check to ensure that a controller correctly populates status,
or that a request is appropriately routed to the desired backend with any
relevant modifications.

Each test definition will include the following:

* Name
* Description
* Support Level

In the future, this will be expanded to include:

* Docs URL
* Function to determine feature enablement

### Prepopulated Gateways

Some implementations of Gateway API support prepopulated or unmanaged `Gateway`
resources that refer to an underlying server that was created by other means
(e.g. `Helm`) rather than provisioning and managing the server according to the
`Gateway` resource. To ensure that our conformance tests can adequately cover
these implementations, Gateways and any accompanying infrastructure may be
preloaded into the cluster in which conformance tests will run. Importantly,
Routes, ReferencePolicies, Services, or other resources used by the test MUST
NOT be prepopulated. This approach will require a `--prepopulated-gateways` flag
to be set, this will also be represented in the resulting conformance report.

## Certification process

The Gateway API project will provide a process by which an implementation may
submit the results of a run of the conformance test suite to a centralized,
open repository, and once verified, these results will be used to maintain a
canonical list of certified conformant implementations.

Ideally, this process should be handled using similar methods to upstream
Kubernetes, while also learning what we can from what the upstream conformance
efforts wish they could improve.

## Alternatives Considered

### Tests Derived from Gateways

It could be possible to write a testing framework that could derive the tests
to run from Gateways that were present in a given cluster. For example, if a
Gateway was present with an HTTP listener, it would run all tests that were
possible with that type of listener.

This approach could be especially helpful for implementations that do not yet
support provisioning arbitrary Gateways. With the current proposal, these
implementations would have to prepopulate a predefined set of Gateways for
testing.

Unfortunately, this approach also comes with some significant downsides:

1. Implementations would still have to prepopulate Gateways.
1. There are many possible inputs and outputs.
1. We would need to test the testing framework to ensure that the correct tests
   were being run with a given input.
1. The testing framework logic could become complicated if we wanted to avoid
   repeating tests that had already been run with other listeners.
1. It may be more difficult to debug these tests if anything went wrong.
1. Tests would need to be smart enough to recognize the side effects of any
   tests that had previously run. For example, multiple tests using the same
   Gateway could result in different status conditions depending on the order
   and/or combination that ran.


## References

* [Gateway API Conformance Ideas](https://docs.google.com/document/d/18iECeKMp1OewSGISskv6Chfmjo9u2U0_iUH0jhPdKOk/edit#)
* [Gateway API Conformance Requirements](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1QL-MpIVzqxe32Y2BZ_dYOB8zNsF9c4pnKEIB9ZLt118/edit)
* [Gateway API Conformance Details](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1QL-MpIVzqxe32Y2BZ_dYOB8zNsF9c4pnKEIB9ZLt118/edit)
