# GEP-1709: Conformance Profiles

* Issue: [#1709](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/issues/1709)
* Status: Provisional

## TLDR

Add selectable profiles for conformance tests which implementations can
subscribe to. Also add the ability to report conformance results back to the
Gateway API project and receive recognition.

## Goals

- Add high level profiles which downstream implementations can subscribe to in
  order to run tests for the associated supported feature sets.
- Add a reporting mechanism where conformance results can be reported back to
  the Gateway API project and provide "badges" to visibly decorate the
  implementations as conformant according to their profiles.
- Expand conformance testing documentation significantly so that it becomes the
  "landing zone" for new prospective implementations and provides a clear and
  iterative process for how to get started implementing Gateway API support.

## Non-Goals

- We want to avoid adding any infrastructure for the reporting mechanism if
  feasible.

## Introduction

Since our conformance test suite was conceived of it's been our desire to
provide simple high level profiles that downstream implementations can
subscribe to. Today there's a little bit of this available in the way of
`SupportedFeatures` which can be subscribed to when running the tests, but the
purpose of this GEP is to take that a step further (and a level higher) and
create subscribable named profiles which indicate a "level of conformance"
which implementations can prove they satisfy and be recognized for.

## API

TODO

## References

TODO
