# GEP 1856: Egress
Issue: [#1856](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/issues/1856)

Status: Withdrawn

## TLDR
Egress traffic is any traffic that originates inside a Kubernetes cluster that is bound for an endpoint outside of the cluster. Egress Traffic in Kubernetes is a common use case for Service Providers to provision outbound traffic that requires a Gateway resource to provide Source Network Address Translation (SNAT) capabilities.

This GEP intends to provide formal rules for how an application can reach an endpoint outside of the cluster via a Gateway. The egress path is protocol agnostic and the Gateway can be connected to multiple external networks.

## Goals
- Provide a standardize configuration for provisioning egress for any protocol through a single Gateway.
- Egress Gateways can be connected to different external networks.
- Provision for using SNAT to allow for identification of cloud-native network functions (CNFs) via engineered IP assignments for security purposes.
- Allow CNFs to be addressed by their external IPs regardless of whether they are being access from within the cluster or from outside the cluster.

## Non-Goals
Security functionality should be kept outside this capability. We can have these be referenced as appropriate. For example, access control list (ACL) to limit access to resources like an IP, domain name, etc.

IP address management for SNATing will not duplicate non-trivial IPAM (IP address management) capabilities, only simple capability will be provided here.

Potential future use cases such as:

- Provision to allow for IPv4 to IPv6 translation on the way out of the cluster. For example, maintaining a map of IPv4/IPv6 addresses to allow IPv4 internal resources to transparently access IPv6 external resources. In order to not overcomplicate the initial GEP, this can be postponed for future use case. Egress NAT44 is a common use case.
- Allow CNFs using peering protocols like Diameter to function by allowing connections to originate in either direction. To support this capability will require session/protocol state tracking, that is beyond the scope of this GEP.
- Allow attaching policies (specifics to come later). For example, attaching a TLS Policy to an Egress use case. 

## Introduction
There are a number of scenarios where it is very useful to control and direct egress traffic to multiple external network domains. For example, any time you have an isolated network (vlan, vrf, etc.) that should be accessed by certain apps on not others. An example might be a front-end server that is exposed to the Internet versus a back-end database that is isolated.

Multiple external network support is vital in telco use cases. An almost-universal pattern in telco operators involves isolating different egress traffic into different network domains, such as for radio access, operations, service-to-service, DMZ to Internet, IMS, mobile user traffic, etc. Network function applications require access to different network domains, in a controlled manner.

When there are multiple external networks involved, there needs to be a model for how to control access to the different networks. The suggested model in this GEP is to allow the Infrastructure Provider to define what networks are available for a Gateway Class. Each Gateway instantiated would then connect to a single one of the networks, with those Gateways allowing routes to/from defined K8S namespaces. This allows the Cluster Operator to control who accesses each of the external networks. In the model, the application developers need only to request routes to/from the right Gateways.

Beyond connecting to multiple external network domains, it is very important in many scenarios (specifically including Telco) to be able to identify individual applications egressing a cluster, based on the source IP. In scenarios where firewalls and access control lists (ACLs) are in use, it is standard to control access based on source/destination IP addresses. For those firewall policies to be meaningful, it is vital for application traffic to be individually identifiable, based on source IP. Because of this, controlling the source IP (SNAT) on egressing traffic is a key use case.

## API
(... details, can point to PR with changes)

## Alternatives
(List other design alternatives and why we did not go in that direction)

## References
(Add any additional document links. Again, we should try to avoid too much content not in version control to avoid broken links)

Telco use cases: https://docs.google.com/document/d/13xAF_pqH2bV8x4MfXWde47esCdVwow1-nig6iy_rafA/edit
