# GEP-1958: TLS ALPN Routing
Issue: #1958
Status: Provisional
## TLDR
Add support for routing traffic based on the application protocols present in the "client hello" step of a TLS handshake.

## Goals

- Provide a way to route a TLS connection to a specific backend based on application protocols.
- Define expected behavior for routing based on application protocols with respect to ordering and ambiguous matches.

## Non-Goals
- Match or detect protocols outside of the context of the application protocols present in the TLS client hello.
- Provide routing based on any other TLS extensions.

## Introduction
ALPN (application-layer protocol negotiation) is a TLS extension which is present in the TLS client hello.
It allows a client to specify a list of supported protocols when initiating a TLS connection.

Similar to SNI (server name indication), another TLS extension present in the TLS client hello, ALPN can be used
to route connections to different backends based on what application protocols the client supports.

With this feature service owners may specify a list of application protocols to match and route TLS connections to a specific backend.

This is a feature supported by the following load balancers:

- [Envoy](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/configuration/listeners/listener_filters/tls_inspector#config-listener-filters-tls-inspector)
- [Nginx](http://nginx.org/en/docs/stream/ngx_stream_ssl_preread_module.html)
- [Traefik](https://doc.traefik.io/traefik/routing/routers/#rule_1)

## API

(... details, can point to PR with changes)


## Alternatives

(List other design alternatives and why we did not go in that
direction)

## References

(Add any additional document links. Again, we should try to avoid
too much content not in version control to avoid broken links)
