# GEP-1713: Standard Mechanism to Merge Multiple Gateways

* Issue: [#1713](/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/issues/1713)
* Status: Provisional

(See status definitions [here](overview.md#status).)

## tl;dr

The Gateway Resource is a contention point since it is the only place to attach listeners with certificates. We propose a mechanism to allow distinct Gateway resources to be logically merged.

## Goals

- Define a mechanic to merge multiple Gateways (logically)
- Define a set of acceptable properties that can be merged and their semantics

## Non-Goals

- Apply a Gateway resource onto N distinct gateways (one to many)

## Introduction

Knative generates on demand per-service certificates using HTTP-01 challenges. There can be O(1000) Knative Services in the cluster which means we have O(1000) distinct certificates. Thus updating a single Gateway resource with this many certificates is a contention point and inhibits horizontal scaling of our controllers.

The spec currently has language to indicate implementations `MAY` merge Gateways resources but the mechanic isn't defined.
https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/blob/541e9fc2b3c2f62915cb58dc0ee5e43e4096b3e2/apis/v1beta1/gateway_types.go#L76-L78

## API

We propose adding a new `infrastructure` stanza to the `spec` field of a Gateway. Within `infrastructure` there is an `attachTo` field of type `LocalObjectReference`. Although the use of `LocalObjectReference` allows users to attach to any `kind`, this GEP only defines the behaviour of attaching a Gateway to another Gateway.


See [GEP-1867](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/pull/1868) for more use cases of `infrastructure`.

#### Go

```go
type GatewaySpec struct {
  // Infrastructure defines infrastructure level attributes about this Gateway instance.
  Infrastructure GatewayInfrastructure `json:"infrastructure"`
  // ...
}

type GatewayInfrastructure struct {
  // AttachTo allows the Gateway to associate itself with another resource.
  // A common scenario is to reference another Gateway which marks
  // this Gateway a child of another.
  AttachTo LocalObjectReference `json:"attachTo"`
}
```

#### YAML
```yaml
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  name: child-gateway
spec:
  gatewayClassName: example
  infrastructure:
    attachTo:
      name: parent-gateway
      kind: Gateway
      group: gateway.networking.k8s.io
  listeners:
  - name: metrics
    port: 8080
    protocol: HTTP
```

### Semantics


#### Gateway Attaching

Gateways that _do not_ reference another Gateway (using `spec.infrastructure.attachTo`) are considered "primary" Gateways. A "child" Gateway is one where `spec.infrastructure.attachTo` field is set to a "primary" Gateway. A "sibling" is a Gateway that shares a "parent" with another "child" Gateway.


Failure to attach a "child" Gateway to another MUST result in the "child" Gateway setting their `Accepted` condition to `False`. This MUST happen in the following scenarios:
- Attaching to another "child" Gateway
- Attaching to oneself (self-referential)
- Attaching to a non-existing Gateway
- Attaching to a Gateway with a different `GatewayClassName` 

If a Gateway's `Accepted` condition is `False` then the conditions 'Programmed' and 'Ready' (if supported) MUST be set to `False`.

#### Route Attaching

Routes MUST be able to specify a "child" Gateways as a `parentRef` and make use of the fields in `ParentReference` to help target a specific listener.


```yaml
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: HTTPRoute
metadata:
  name: httproute-example
spec:
  parentRefs:
  - name: acme-lb
    sectionName: https
```

#### Merging Spec Fields


#### GatewayClassName 

The `GatewayClassName` MUST be set on "child" and "primary" Gateways and be equivalent.

#### Listeners

Implementations MUST treat the "primary" Gateway as having the concatenated list of all listeners from "child" Gateways.

Validation of this list of listeners is subject to the discussion here: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/issues/1842

eg.
```yaml
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  name: parent-gateway
spec:
  gatewayClassName: example
  listeners:
  - name: HTTP
    port: 80
    protocol: HTTP 
---
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  name: child-gateway
spec:
  gatewayClassName: example
  infrastructure:
    attachTo:
      name: parent-gateway
      kind: Gateway
      group: gateway.networking.k8s.io
  listeners:
  - name: metrics
    port: 8080
    protocol: HTTP    
```

With this configuration, the realized "primary" Gateway should listen on port `80` and `8080`.


#### Addresses

Merging `Addresses` is not supported and the "child" Gateway's `Addresses` MUST be empty.


### Status Fields


#### Addresses

The list of `Addresses` that appear in the status of the "child" Gateway MUST be the same as the "parent" Gateway.

#### Listeners

The "child" Gateways MUST provide a status for each Listener defined in their specification. Listeners defined in "sibling" and the "parent" Gateway SHOULD NOT appear on a "child" Gateway.
Listeners in "child" Gateways SHOULD NOT appear on the "parent" Gateway.

#### Conditions

"Child" Gateways MUST support the same types of status conditions as "parent" Gateways.


## Future Goals 

### Requirement Level

We want to keep this API very simple so that the merging requirement level could increase from `MAY` to `MUST`


## Alternatives

#### New Resource
A `GatewayListener` resource could be a simpler solution as we would not have to set required fields (ie. gatewayClassName)

```
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: GatewayListener
metadata:
  name: listener
spec:
  gateway: parent-gateway
  listeners:
  - name: metrics
    port: 8080
    protocol: HTTP
status: ...
```

#### Use of the `gateway.networking.k8s.io/parent-gateway` label

Use of a label (ie. `gateway.networking.k8s.io/parent-gateway: name`) could be used to select child gateways vs using `spec.infrastructure.attachTo`

## References
Mentioned in Prior GEPs:
- https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/pull/1757

Prior Discussions: 
- https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/discussions/1248
- https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/discussions/1246


